---
title: "Monitoring Groundwater and Surface Water Nutrient Fluxes on Lake Erie’s Eastern Shore"
collection: presentations
type: "Poster"
permalink: /presentations/NY6-2017-09-23
venue: "New York Six Liberal Arts Consortium 7th Annual Undergraduate Research Conference 2017"
date: 2017-09-23
location: "Skidmore College, Saratoga Springs, New York"
---

Jenny Soonthornrangsan, Hamilton College, 2019, Geosciences and Mathematics

Lake Erie’s degrading water quality has become an issue of concern due to excess amounts of nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus. The U.S. and Canadian governments released the State of the Great Lakes 2017 Report stating that Lake Erie’s status of nutrients is poor. As a result, the federal government is putting efforts to monitor the main tributaries entering Lake Erie to determine the major sources of nutrient flux. This research contributes to the federal government’s monitoring goals and expands on current studies by examining both groundwater and surface water as potential sources of nutrient fluxes at Woodlawn Beach State Park, located on the eastern shore of Lake Erie. With two tributaries and a wetland that flow into the lake, Woodlawn Beach was an ideal field site to install stream gages and nested groundwater wells. Four surface waters and ten groundwater wells were sampled bi-weekly during the spring to summer 2017 field season to test for nitrogen, phosphorus, and its constituents (i.e. total phosphorus, nitrite, and total nitrogen). Stream discharge into the lake was calculated using rating curves that plot observed stream stage versus discharge. Comparing nutrient fluxes from groundwater and surface waters showed that ammonia was a major contributor of groundwater nutrient flux into the lake while surface water nutrient fluxes were much lower. These results emphasize the importance of expanding research to consider groundwater nutrient flux in addition to surface water nutrient flux. Further analysis is needed to find the source of ammonia before it becomes detrimental to the health of humans and organisms alike.
